Hello and welcome back to the course on artificial intelligence.
Today we're talking about the Temporal Difference.
Now it's very important to trial because Temporal Difference is the heart and soul of the queue learning
algorithm.
This is actually how everything we've learned so far comes together into play inside key learning.
So let's have a look.
Remember the time when we talked about deterministic versus non deterministic search.
And remember how we said in this case it's when the agent wants to go up he definitely goes up and when.
In this case he wants to go up there's a 10 percent chance he'll go or left 10 percent chance he'll
go right and an 80 percent chance he'll go right go straight up.
Well these numbers are of course arbitrary and can be different.
And this whole concept is could be different in different problems.
So doesn't have to concern which way he's moving is that there's some randomness.
Something as out of the control of the agent happening inside this environment and what effect that
had is.
As you remember was that in the deterministic example it was very easy to calculate the V values.
Well not necessarily always very easy.
But in our case we could just simply calculate them by using the bellman equation and we we had the
exact values and then as you remember I very carefully mentioned that these values for the non deterministic
search example are off the top of my head.
They're not calculus we know lost at that time I said we know we're just not going to calculate them
because it's very complex but the computer could do it and we just went along with these values that
are just values that I made up.
But they did get the job done they helped us understand the concept.
Well now we're going to return to that a little bit and understand what exactly is going on here why
is it so much harder to calculate these values in the non deterministic example or generally speaking
in these problems in these environments and the agent going through them.
Why is it.
Why can it be so hard to calculate these values.
Well when you think about it because when the agent moves for for instance from here to the right he
doesn't necessarily always move that way sometimes as a chance that he'll go to and to when instead
of going straight so let's call these NSW.
So in 0 9 instead of going west the agent might sometimes go south and for instance from here instead
of going north he might sometimes go east.
So sorry.
So here instead of going east he might sometimes go south and here instead of going north he might sometimes
go east or west and here instead of going north he might sometimes go west east or west and so on and
so and therefore so in order to calculate this value you would need to know what this values but the
interesting thing is that in order to calculate this value you need to know what this value is.
So there is a lot of recursion happening here and therefore you cannot just decide to define what these
values are.
And on top of that this recursion is not deterministic.
It is sometimes it happens this way Sometimes it's up uphill go right sometimes instead of going up
he'll go left sometimes it's there when he wants to go up he will go up.
So it is subject to chance and so maybe many times the agent will go through this path and he'll go
up up up up up and he'll think that from here he always kind of goes up and so the value of the state
will go will be good and then all of a sudden he'll drop into the pit and this value will go down.
And so therefore you can see how there is some stochastic city or randomness to this whole calculation
on these values because they're all interlinked.
Plus on top you've got that randomness in this inherent in the environment because there's a mark of
decision process.
So that's where all of this comes together and that's where we're going to introduce the concept of
the Temporal Difference which will allow the agent to calculate these values.
And here we were dealing with these values and since then we've already moved on to Q values.
So that's what we're going to be working with we're going to be looking at Q values.
So as you recall this is our Belman equation for Q values.
So a Q value or the.
The value of performing a certain action a state s is equal to the reward that you get after performing
that actions immediately after that action plus you get the maximum you get the gamma of the sum of
all the possible.
So you kind of get the expected value of the state that you will end up in.
So as you recall that was our formula for the Beldon accurate equation and now just for simplicity's
sake we're going to rewrite it in the old fashioned way in the way that we used to talk about the Belmont
equation before we knew about the success the city.
So remember this was our Belmont equation in the sense of a deterministic search example because here
you don't have that expected value you don't have the somewhere across all probabilities you just have
that as if it's determined you're going to end up what states you're going to end up and then you're
taking the max in that one state.
And the reason we're rewriting it is simply the only reason is because it is just easier to write it
and it'll be easier just to fall along with the formula.
So we're going to just remember that we replaced this part with this part and also you'll find this
notation in a lot of literature so it'll be easier for you to follow along with other sources if you're
standing those but do remember that in fact what we mean is this probabilistic approach here instead
of this notation it's just easier for us to operate this and understand what's going on and just kind
of like look at the equation so that they're not too cluttered.
But once again just remember that in fact what we mean is this probabilistic approach over here.
And so we're actually near Newtown so let's have a look at what's going on.
So here is our blank state of the maze.
We don't have any Q values let's see or we may but let's just keep it blank for now let's just look
at one of the states either one of the cells and this one specifically and here we have for instance
for the action of going up we have a Q value that we calculate so it's not that we don't have any Q
values yet we worry we do but we're just not illustrating anything we're just keeping a blank for simplicity's
sake but we have the edge has been walking around for some time and let's say hypothetically somehow
he's calculated this Q value of going up or north from this state from this specific cell and the values
Q S and a.
And so now what we have.
So he is currently with his blue arrows pointing to the agent is sitting in this cell and now he needs
to make a choice where is he going to go.
And he knows the value of this of action going north and that is Q and A and here I'm saying before
and the reason for that is because he that is before he takes action he hasn't taken action yet.
So he's still in the cell and before he's taken action the value here is Q an estimate and now he actually
takes the action.
So let's say he decides this the best one he takes action and he moves up to this sell well.
Now what happens is now comes after so after he's taken action we can measure what is this value let's
just calculate this value the value of the reward of for taking that action plus gamma times the maximum
of this new state that he's just gotten into s prime.
And so the maximum across all possible actions and aspirin.
And so what we have here is the value before in of that action.
And then we've calculated this metric afterwards.
But as you can recall from the previous formula.
So if we could go back very quickly from the previous formula where we just calculated is indeed the
value that is how Q of S&P is calculated.
So this right Pa we've just calculated it separately but after we've taken action so as Avon's again
before we knew a cue of an estimated value something that we've calculated through our iterations produces
something.
So a value that's stored in our memory.
So just like a number that we know and now after the actions being performed we know what reward he
actually got what reward the agent actually got.
And we can calculate this new value.
So in essence we're kind of recalculating this value but now with new information the new information
is the reward that we got and plus what state we ended up in and what the maximum across that state
what that this new value is for that specific date that we're looking at.
So what's the value of that being in that state.
So basically the Q of NSN.
But given the new information and now the Temporal Difference is defined as t d of a n s of these two
of the difference between these two.
So here the first element is your after value.
So the kind of like Q of S and a but calculated afterwards and the previous Q of NSA and a which you
had stored in your memory.
And so the question is are they different.
So ideally they should be the same.
Ideally this should be the same as is simply because this is the formula for calculating this.
But the thing is that this is not something we collect.
This is something that we have from empirical evidence something that we have from just going through
the maze many times and calculate so this is something we've come up with so far it's not related to
the current iteration.
It's something that we came up with previously a long time not a long time ago but in one of our previous
iterations going through the maze whereas this is something we've calculated just now adds there is
no guarantee that they're going to be the same and because of the randomness that exists in the maze.
Because this could have been calculated and saw some certain random events were triggered and this can
be called to a different random events have been triggered.
And so now let's rewrite that over here.
Let's just move it up there.
So how do we use this.
The question is.
OK.
So we have this temporal difference.
How do we use this and why is it called a temporal difference.
Well the reason is called the temporal difference is because you're basically calculating the same thing
you're calculating queue of S.A. so the cue value of that action you calculate here and you're calculating
it here.
But the difference is time.
This is your queue of assigned a previously.
This is your queue of S and a.
Now your new curious.
And the question is it has there been a difference.
Have there's been a shift between them in time and how can we use this to our advantage.
If there is indeed has been this shift in time.
Well one thing would we could do is we could say OK well you know our queue of S and a doesn't this
new value doesn't equal old so we're going to get rid of the old we'll forget about the old and we'll
just use this as a new value.
But that would not be smart.
And the reason for that is that in our environment the random events can have sometimes happen.
And what if our old QSL Afsane was something that you know consistently happens like 80 percent of the
time.
And then like was represented by what happens 80 percent of the time.
And then this new one just what happened due to randomness.
In that case we're gonna throw away the the one that is responsible for the bulk of the situation and
we're going to replace it with something that happens only 10 or 20 percent of the time.
That wouldn't be the best approach to go.
And that's why that's exactly why we don't want to completely change our Q values.
We want to use like change in step by step a little bit by little bit.
And that's why we're going to use this temporal difference in a specific way.
So we're going to say Here's a formula we're going to take our cue of SLA and we're going to update
it in such a way we're going to take the old value of KUSA and we are going to add alpha time the temporal
difference.
So Alpha is going to be our learning rate.
That's a new parameter that we're introducing that's how quickly is the algorithm learning.
So basically we're taking this difference and whatever it is we're adding it on to our previous kill
in the Senate.
Now this formula probably doesn't make any sense or just by looking.
It doesn't make any sense because I got curious and a here and give us an A here.
It's the same thing.
So probably should negate each other but we want to rewrite this in a bit of a different way.
So I'm just going to show you again.
I'm just adding time to these formulas so here is Q T minus one the previous year.
Q T minus one the previous here's Kutty.
Then you this should be a circle here a circle here as well.
But never mind.
And here we've got Alpha temporal difference.
The new the current temperature difference so you can see what we're doing.
We're saying OK let's take our current cue is going to be equal to all previous Q Plus whatever temporal
difference we found.
Times alpha this formula here is the heart and soul of the cube learning algorithm.
This is how the cube values are update and it's good that we've already learned what Q values are with
Gamma is what R is and what all of this stuff is.
And now all we need to see is that you have a previous Q value.
Yes that's good.
And then what can happen is that when you taken when you actually do take the action when the agent
takes action he will know he will get a reward and he'll end up in a state.
And so based on that he can calculate aha.
OK.
So what is what would have what should have been the Q value of that move that I made.
And now that is this part of the equation.
Subtract the old Q value gets you.
Temporal Difference.
And now you need to take a alpha time simple difference and that's how you get adjusted to value that's
what you're going to adjust Q value.
And I'll just to finish off this.
This is kind of like this is sufficient to understand what's going on but just to clarify things even
more or perhaps maybe confuse things even more.
What do we need to do is we going to take this Temporal Difference or this temporal difference over
here or plug it into this formula.
So we're going to take all of this part and plug it into this formula and end up with a huge equation.
So here we go there is our equation.
So this is the full equation with the temporal difference written out completely.
And the reason I wrote us this out as well first of all you'll probably find this in other literature
if you study it.
And the second thing is that it makes some things a bit more complex.
Yes the form is longer but also makes some things a bit clearer.
So for instance you can see here the role Alpha place.
You can see it better because look at this.
Here you go Q T minus one.
And here you go.
Q T minus one with a negative side.
So if you plug in alpha equals to 1.
If you put a one in here then this will negate with this.
So they will destroy each other and all you'll have left is this park.
And what that means is exactly that situation where we said all right.
So you've got a new value which it should have been.
Let's update our Q value with the new value.
And forget about whatever we had previously and as we discussed isn't the best approach because there
are random events here and we want to update things step by step and on the other hand if you said Alpha
equal to zero.
What happens then is that you completely forget about this whole part and your q t the new one or the
current one is going to be always equal to the previous one.
So you're not gonna be learning anything and that means whatever is happening in the maze doesn't matter
because you've decided and you Kutty value a long time ago and you're just going to keep it.
So that's why alphas shouldn't be zero or should be one.
It should be somewhere in between and it's going to allow you to learn slowly step by step is going
to allow you to as your or the agent as it goes through the maze is gonna get this temporal difference.
And slowly but surely this value is going to get updated and update I'm.
And what will happen eventually is that at some point hopefully the algorithm will converge.
And what that means is that this temporal difference will start becoming closer and closer to zero and
eventually we just will very close to zero or even zero zero zero zero.
And what that means is that every single time your your new acuity value or your new calculated value
what it should have been.
So not this one but what it hypothetically should have enough to take this step will be just equal to
your previous duty value and then one then it's zero and that means when your temporal difference is
zero means your algorithm has converged and it's not really necessary to continue updating what's going
on.
It does necessary to continue updating your Q values.
The caveat here is that the only time probably one of the only times when you would still want to continue
performing this whole you know updating of your Q values if the environment is constantly changing if
not just is not that it just has some randoms to casting events in it.
But the environment itself is modifying is is morphing is changing with time so you continuously need
to learn because it's not possible for you to learn everything and come up with the optimal policy because
the optimal policy is also changing with the environment all the time.
In that case you will need to continue calculating Temporal Difference and calculate the Q values but
other than that that's kind of like an extra complication.
Other than that this is how Q values of data.
So this is the main formula of the Q learning algorithm and this is kind of like the expanded version
of that and now it should all come together makes sense why we have the Belmont equation and not only
what it represents to Google's but also how the agent goes about updating its Q values and finding exactly
what is going on in that environment so it can come up with the optimal policy.
So I know quite a lot to take in but hopefully you enjoyed today cereal and hopefully you were able
to take away the underlying concepts and intuition behind Q values and what's the whole notion of Temporal
Difference is and why it's important why it helps us slowly train our agents and get them to understand
their environments that they're operating in.
And if you'd like to learn a bit more about temporal differences then a very popular paper is learning
to predict by the methods of temporal differences by Richard Sutton of nineteen eighty eight.
We've already had a reference by Richard Sutton as well but this isn't just another one and actually
has a book.
So if you if you get into his writing style and his style of communication then check out his book as
well.
It is kind of like a more expanded version of all of these things.
I haven't read the book but that's what I'm imagining.
At the same time this is the link to this to the paper and you can learn a bit more about or probably
a lot more about temporal differences there.
And I hope you enjoyed today's tutorial and look forward to you next.
Until then enjoy a.